metaphysics
the word metaphysics is from the greek
meaning literally after physics
it comes to us from the title used for
some of aristotle's works because they
were usually placed after his works on
physics aristotle never used the word he
used the greek for first philosophy
instead perhaps a better label for the
content of metaphysics in truth in a
sense metaphysics can be a statement of
how one might begin now there is in a
papillion framework no preferred
beginning that is true we simply begin
with problems and work towards solutions
but metaphysics in a rational worldview
might simply entail little more than
admitting objective reality exists there
are regularities in that reality we can
come to know them and everything else
better and better over time and there
will always be more to know now none of
those claims like objective reality
exists and there are regularities in it
are themselves part of science morality
history or anything else they are simply
one's working assumptions that science
can work and progress can be made those
need not be beliefs or faith claims they
can just be assumptions never proved and
never needing to be proved it is just
the assumption of realism and optimism
and on that basis we can call this
assumption of realism
knowledge genuine philosophical
knowledge genuine metaphysical knowledge
perhaps genuine knowledge because it
amounts to being a good explanation to
sum up realism is the claim that reality
exists it contains things within it that
we can come to understand better over
time and without limit and some of those
things include principles laws and
fundamental objects that reveal
themselves through regularities in
nature realism coupled with fallibilism
says that the knowledge we construct
could always be wrong because something
exists we can be wrong about and coupled
with the ineffable nature of ultimate
reality itself this fallibility means
our project of creating knowledge is
unbounded it will never end so progress
will not either so long as we continue
making good choices but not everyone is
a fallibilist realist some claim to hold
metaphysical beliefs claims about
ultimate final reality and existence
beyond what science can tell us now
yet they say they know to be true now or
perhaps are confident in being true such
beliefs often amount to the pessimistic
claim that at least somewhere somehow
knowledge creation and progress must
come to a stop because the ultimate
answer is either knowable or
knowable as inherently unknowable by
living mortal beings yes we can place
religious dogma into this category the
idea that ultimately finally a
supernatural world of final perfection
exists beyond this one where all souls
go to be judged this view is often
coupled with the belief of a final
perfect morality which has likewise been
revealed in a text by a being beyond
space and time in a realm of perfection
and a careful study of those texts can
under some conditions provide the
faithful with direct religious insight
into perfection a perfection of such
profound importance it may need to be
defended to the death and spread by the
sword such dogmas lead to tyranny but
they are merely a special case karl
popper remarked that quote the doctrine
the truth is manifest is the root of all
tyranny endquote all tyranny anyone who
thinks they have finally gained some
final truth is liable to regard
themselves as occupying a lofty place
with respect to their fellows they after
all have been granted the ultimate
knowledge the special divine insight and
that insight may be a deep important
truth that if not adopted by society
will lead to its ruination and that is
where the coercion begins after all if
you think your neighbours are just so
wayward in their error they could lead
your immortal soul and the souls of
those you love astray wouldn't you do
extreme things this is after all a
concern about what happens in eternity
but such manifest truth is not only the
domain of religion scientists
philosophers and mathematicians alike
have claimed at times to possess
final truth an entire tradition of
mathematics and education would have it
all students everywhere learn vast
quantities of mathematics because it is
critically important these eternal
truths whether of any practical use of
the student in life ever again or not
are manifest truth and what could be
more valuable inherently than learning
manifest truth we would not waste our
time coercing generation after
generation on the mere assumption of
truth would we others well-credentialed
intellectuals often are perhaps more
sanguine with their manifest truth some
may assert they merely believe in all
logically possible worlds or that the
fundamental nature of reality reduces to
mathematics they cannot prove it to you
they merely believe it so hint hint
perhaps you should too but why what are
the reasons for adopting metaphysical
claims as actual beliefs to be defended
rather than mere assumptions to be
explained in order to make progress why
postulate a thing which is an end in
itself an epistemological cul-de-sac
where ideas go to die and no more
questions need to be asked because no
further progress can be made in that
domain if physical reality truly is all
mathematical for example why can we not
ask
why is it not otherwise
and how do we know
why mathematical and not made of literal
matter instead of literal number why not
moral truth or aesthetic truth why if
all things are possible are we
restricted to mathematics among all
those multiverses can we not have ones
that obey no mathematics could there be
a universe that is nothing but a furious
but giant green pea
obeying no calculus whatsoever except to
maintain a state of eternal rage a
strange question but insisting on final
answers to things is apt to raise them
but only some metaphysical claims rule
out questions at that point only some
insist the truth is manifest which is
why there is a preferred stance for a
realist here we just don't know what the
nature of ultimate final reality is we
can only guess at it but happily for us
our metaphysics grants that each such
guess when subject to criticism can lead
to genuine knowledge because that
metaphysics if we even call it that is
consistent with the rest of our outlook
on these things